A PSA, or Private Social Association, is a business intended to provide the essential services of government without relying on the power of the state, or more specifically, on violence.  To be specific, it is meant to provide a mechanism of trust between unknown parties, or for matters which are too impactful to rely only on the reputations of the involved.

As a brief aside, a PSA is not necessarily in the security business (although it is certainly possible for a firm to enter that industry as well).  This is not a defect, as the government is not in the security business either (contrary to common belief), and can’t be said to even do a good job at pretending it is.  There is much to be said in establishing this fact, though the question has no doubt received far better analysis in other literature, so I will instead offer only this.

If you are robbed, assaulted, or killed, the government will provide no compensation to you or your family for the breach of its supposed duty.  In the absolute best case scenario, they will pursue with some vigor the perpetrator of your harm, and extract from them some measure of restitution.  In the event of their failure, however, you will be left with only what actions you took to prepare for such an event (insurance, savings, etc.), and your only recourse against the state is the vague threat of voting for some other, equally irresponsible party.

If you are not convinced, it is of no matter, as PSAs provide the means to create robust private security firms, and to control them (i.e. avoid the ‘competing gangs’ problem).  I will elaborate on that in a later chapter, so for now I ask you to lay aside your doubts.  Instead, we will focus on the question of trust.

There are two kinds of trust necessary for a society to function at scale.  The first is the narrow and rigidly defined trust one gets from a contract, i.e. that your counter party in a business arrangement will make good on their word.  The second is the broad and loosely defined trust that your neighbors will behave in a socially cohesive manner, sometimes referred to as a social contract.

PSAs deal with both kinds of contracts, although the exact arrangement ultimately depends on the interplay between market desires and entrepreneurial imagination.  I will nevertheless suggest some structures as a start, although for now I will deal in more general terms.  A PSA will ‘enforce’ either contract not with violence, but rather with incentives.  Essentially, they will provide some benefit to their members, and deny them that benefit if they violate their contract.

To illustrate, allow me to offer a brief story, with the understanding that any specific details are meant as a suggestion at best.

Alice is a member of Alpha association.  Alpha may offer several services, but in particular, they will vouch for Alice’s character when she deals with third parties, such as her employer.  As a condition for her membership, Alice agrees to adhere to a certain standard of behavior, including (amongst other things) that she will not deprive another person of their property (i.e. she will not steal).

Nevertheless, Alice decides she especially likes Bob’s hat, and so removes it from his head and flees the scene.  For simplicity, we will assume Bob and Alice are both members of Alpha, that Bob is aware of this fact, and of Alice’s identity.  Bob alerts his association to Alice’s behavior, and they contact Alice to inform her that she must return the stolen hat, and compensate Bob some amount of money for his trouble.

If Alice accepts these terms, Bob regains his property, and Alice continues on with her life, hopefully in a more responsible manner (the protocol for repeat offenders may differ, depending ultimately on the realities of the market and the imagination of entrepreneurs).  If Alice rejects these terms, then Alice will no longer receive the benefits of membership in Alpha, in particular their guarantee of her character for the purpose of employment.

Unless Alice is independently wealthy (in which case the situation is more complicated, but by no means intractable), this will put her in a difficult position.  Her employer is likely to fire her after learning there is no guarantee of good behavior, and it is unlikely any other firm would be interested in bringing her on.  She could attempt to join another association, but once informed of her misdeeds, they are likely to insist upon similar means of redress to the one which she tried to avoid.