In order for different associations to interact (as in through the PSA Council), it will be helpful for them to have a group of shared principles.  The actual makeup of those principles will ultimately be a question of consumer desire, as well as what can be made to work.  Nevertheless, I offer these principles as a suggested starting point.  I will also not that it is likely people with wildly different principles will need to be geographically separated, or at least will need to fall under a different PSA Council.

In any case, the one’s I feel will best work for the widest number of people are responsibility, property rights, and respecting self-defense.  Of the three, the first is likely the most important, as it assures people that unknown parties they encounter in their day to day life are responsible for their choices.  By responsible, I mean they possess a willingness to provide restitution in the event their actions cause some unintended (or intended) harm to another party.

By property rights, I am referring to a respect for the idea of ownership, or the right of exclusion to a persons effects and land.  Exactly how these property rights should be formulated is a ultimately a question for the PSA Council, although I will provide some suggestions elsewhere.

The final principal I consider important is respect for the right of self-defense.  I consider it fundamental to safety, and security is something which the vast majority of people value highly. In order for associations to be attractive to the masses (and thus as profitable as possible), they need to prove themselves a safe way to live.  Any society which turns on members who defend themselves (with reasonable force) will quickly descend into anarcho-tyranny or else require an unparalleled surveillance state (aka, regular tyranny).

For self defense, I would actually suggest a fairly broad view of it.  For instance, if some horde of barbarians was attacking a neighboring city, and could reasonably considered likely to continue their conquest for the present city at a later date, the members of that horde could not file claims against the residents of that city should they organize a force and attack preemptively.  The horde would essentially be considered responsible for the violence against them, on accounts of the violence they were perpetrating against others.

The exact degree to which that applied to vary a lot, I’m sure, and possibly change over time.  Of course, I consider it extremely unlikely any kind of barbarian horde could actually form, but still, I think the principle could be applied to more mundane situations as well.