Natural flow is an extension of property rights, or perhaps a recognition of a intuitive idea we have about them taken to its logical conclusions.  In any case, although Natural Flow is not fundamental to an associative system at all, I nevertheless feel it would be beneficial to codify it into the PSA Council.

It applies (mostly?) to defining the ownership of real estate, and specifically includes the natural flow of things through a piece of land as one of the properties owned by that land.  That probably isn’t very clear, and I can’t think of a more formal definition, so I’ll provide some examples.

For starters, consider a very simplified case where Alice owns small farm with a river down the middle.  She draws a reasonable portion of this water to irrigate her crops, and leaves the rest to flow into the ocean.  The river flows from a single source, a spring some distance upriver, in Bob’s land.

One day, Bob decides to start selling bottled water, so he caps off the spring and captures it all, causing Alice’s portion of the river to dry up.  This would violate the “natural flow” of the water, and Alice would have a legitimate grievance which could be brought to the applicable dispute resolution service who would find in her favor.

If we were to vary this scenario slightly, and suppose Bob only drew half the water from the spring, and allowed the remaining half to flow into Alice’s land, he would (in this case) be considered to have drawn off his share of the natural flow, and would not have transgressed against Alice.  This example ignores the potentially important question of, “What is the ocean’s share?”  I suppose it is likely some percentage, though I have no basis to guess and so will leave it to more informed parties to determine the answer.

This first example might give the impression natural flow is restricted to water, but I think there is value in applying it more broadly.  To demonstrate, consider the following scenario.

Alice owns a vast swath of woodland which she manages as a nature preserve.  On this land is a herd of deer (you may assume they are endangered, if it strikes your fancy) which migrates through the forest in a wide arc.  There is a small sliver of land which she does not own, but is instead held by Bob.  The entire herd passes through the sliver once a year, and one day Bob decides to get into the Venison business.  He waits for the deer to enter his land, then proceeds to kill all of them, and sell them as jerky.

This would also be a violation of the natural flow, and again Alice would succeed in making a claim against Bob.

Natural flow has obvious application in managing water rights and nature conservation, but it also works in the reverse as well.  Allow me to provide an example.

Alice owns a small house on the prairie.  She lives quietly, until one day Bob builds his industrial garbage incinerator next door.  Bob is exceptionally lazy (and perhaps a bit of an ass), so he pipes the exhaust for his factory to the edge of his land, aiming straight at Alice’s cabin.  As could be expected, this expels ludicrous quantities of pollution straight into Alice’s home.  This also violates the natural flow, in that toxic fumes don’t naturally flow into her house.  In this case, a mediator would again find in favor of Alice.

It is worth noting that in all these cases the solution isn’t necessarily for Bob to stop whatever it was he was doing, rather it would suffice for him to restore the natural flow in some manner roughly equivalent to how it was earlier.  For instance, in the first case, if we assume Bob’s spring water business turns a substantial profit, he may opt to purchase an equivalent quantity of desalinated water and release it down the river for Alice.

In the second example Bob could, theoretically, supplement the deer herd with ones he purchased from elsewhere (supposing he could find some at a lower price).  In the third example Bob could process/clean the exhaust (and not pipe it directly at Alice’s house).