Although something like a secured association is probably necessary, the general idea I’m proposing here could actually have been applied to a legal system as well.  Anyway, the core idea behind a secured association is that it is an association where the members have their movement restricted in some way.  Put another way, it’s like a prison, but the prisoners get to choose where they stay.

The purpose is much the same as for a regular prison, namely it is a place where people who have proven themselves incapable of adjusting to society can stay without putting others in danger.  Asides from the security, they would generally have all the same options as other people.

The exact nature of any given secured association, and of secured associations will ultimately come down to what works for their customers, their ‘customers’, and the firms running them, though I can make some guesses as to what they might look like.  For starters, the associations will likely be paid for by their members, same as any other kind of association, although these ones are bound to have many more rules.  Given that, it is also likely the associates will be permitted to earn a living with whatever skills they happen to possess.

I also suspect there will be a very wide variety of secured associations, as some unscrupulous compulsive fraudster will probably not want to share a living space with a serial rapist, and will also likely have drastically different security needs (although, in both of those cases, security from the outside might be just as important as securing them inside, at least to them).

The next question is why might someone end up in a secured association, and the obvious answer is, “Because they were compelled to.”  Exactly how may vary from person to person and situation to situation, but in general some party will be given the choice between being unassociated (essentially exiled from society) or joining a secured association.  This choice will not necessarily be imposed upon them by any particular party, but rather can be a natural consequence of their situation.

To be more specific, suppose there is a serial rapist who’s monstrous nature is discovered and widely known.  Even without an armed posse breathing down their neck, no normal association will want them as a customer.  Ignoring the PR problem of having them as a member, a rapist represents a financial liability, as the association will be required to provide restitution to any of their future (and possibly past) victims.

The rapist themself also has a tremendous incentive to get somewhere safe, as many parties will have strong motivations for revenge.  Joining a secured association will allow them to retain some measure of a life, even if most of their income is diverted to compensating their victims.

Although I feel covering such an extreme case should be more than sufficient to demonstrate the value and function of secured associations, I think they have even great value in milder scenarios.  For instance, suppose some young man had a shitty childhood, and reacted to it by becoming a compulsive shoplifter.  He might be incapable of joining a regular association, and would almost certainly not want to join the association with the serial rapist, but could likely find a secured association which caters to cases such as his.

He could find one with a good reputation, or could perhaps be recommended one by a security firm, and join them until he could prove to a regular association that he would no longer be a liability.  The secured association this young man joined could specialize in rehabilitation, and thanks to competition would likely excel at providing fruitful counseling and therapy (or by some other mechanism instilling virtue into troubled young men).

If this rehabilitation association was not good at its job, it is unlikely it would have a good reputation.  Also, several economic factors would tend to, by natural selection, only leave behind rehabilitative associations that worked.  For instance, if the young man spent years with a firm, and didn’t feel he was making progress, he would likely switch to another firm.

Also, in order to attract customers, these firms would likely offer some guarantee of efficacy, like a certificate of good standing backed by the firm.  If such a certificate was issued in error too frequently, the firm would loose money relative to their competition, and have to charge a higher rate to their customers, which could trigger a market share loss death spiral if corrective action wasn’t taken.

I’m sure a clever statist could adapt concept to their own system, but I don’t care, so that will be left as an exercise for the hypothetical party who does.